>> Woodruff: AS PRO-RUSSIAN
SEPARATISTS FORCE UKRAINIAN
TROOPS TO RETREAT, THE REBELS
SAY THEY ARE WILLING TO TALK
PEACE WITH KIEV.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
GWEN IFILL IS AWAY.ALSO AHEAD TY
MONDAY.
PAUL SOLMAN REPORTS ON THE
CHALLENGES MILLIONS OF AMERICANS
WORKING PART-TIME JOBS FACE IN
ORDER TO MAKE ENDS MEET, AS
EMPLOYERS CRACK DOWN ON LABOR
COSTS.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, WITH THE
RISKS OF PLAYING FOOTBALL COME
SOME VIRTUES.
WHAT THE SPORT CAN TEACH BOYS
ABOUT BECOMING SMART, STRONG AND
TOUGH MEN.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE STORIES
WE'RE COVERING ON TONIGHT'S PBS
NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE HEAD OF NATO IS
CALLING FOR A "SPEARHEAD FORCE"
TO DETER ANY RUSSIAN AGGRESSION
IN EASTERN EUROPE.
ANDERS FOGH RASMUSSEN ANNOUNCED
THE PLAN TODAY, IN RESPONSE TO
RUSSIA'S ACTIONS IN UKRAINE.
IT CALLS FOR SEVERAL THOUSAND
TROOPS, READY TO MOVE ON SHORT
NOTICE.
ALLIANCE LEADERS WILL CONSIDER
THE PLAN ON THURSDAY.
WE'LL TURN TO THE DAY'S EVENTS
IN UKRAINE, AFTER THE NEWS
SUMMARY.
THE UNITED NATIONS HUMAN RIGHTS
COUNCIL TODAY  CONDEMNED THE
ISLAMIC STATE GROUP FOR WHAT IT
CALLED ABUSES ON "AN
UNIMAGINABLE SCALE."
THE COUNCIL APPROVED AN
INVESTIGATION OF THE MILITANTS'
ACTIONS IN IRAQ, FROM MASS
KILLINGS TO SEXUAL ABUSE TO
FORCED CONVERSION.
THIS CAME AFTER IRAQ'S HUMAN
RIGHTS MINISTER APPEALED FOR
HELP, SAYING, "WE ARE FACING A
TERRORIST MONSTER."
>> ( translated ): FROM HERE, I
CALL UPON COUNTRIES ALL OVER THE
WORLD TO TAKE A RESPONSIBLE
STAND IN LINE WITH INTERNATIONAL
CONVENTIONS, NORMS AND
HUMANITARIAN PRINCIPLES AND
VALUES, TO TAKE A CLEAR-CUT AND
STRONG ACTION AGAINST THE
ISLAMIC STATE GROUP.
IT IS NOT AN IRAQI PHENOMENON,
IT IS A TERRORIST ORGANIZATION
THAT JEOPARDIZES THE SECURITY
AND PEACE OF COUNTRIES ALL OVER
THE WORLD.
>> Woodruff: MEANWHILE, IRAQ'S
CARETAKER PRIME MINISTER
NOURI AL-MALIKI VISITED THE
SMALL TOWN OF AMERLI TODAY.
IT WAS RE-TAKEN BY IRAQI FORCES
ON SUNDAY, AFTER A TWO-MONTH
SIEGE BY THE "ISLAMIC STATE"
GROUP.
MALIKI TOURED THE STREETS AND
SPOKE WITH SHIITE TURKMEN
TOWNSPEOPLE.
HE BRANDED THE MILITANTS "BEASTS
AND KILLERS" AND PLEDGED IRAQ
WILL SEND THEM ALL TO THEIR
DEATHS.
THE SIEGE WAS BROKEN WITH THE
HELP OF U.S. AIR STRIKES.
IN AFGHANISTAN, TALKS ON A
POWER-SHARING DEAL BETWEEN RIVAL
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES HAVE
COLLAPSED.
ABDULLAH ABDULLAH'S CAMP SAID
TODAY THAT HE AND ASHRAF GHANI
FAILED TO AGREE ON THE POWERS
FOR A "CHIEF EXECUTIVE" IN A
NATIONAL UNITY GOVERNMENT.
THE DEADLOCK RAISES THE RISK OF
CHAOS AS U.S. AND OTHER COMBAT
TROOPS ARE LEAVING.
HEAVY FIGHTING ERUPTED TODAY IN
SYRIA'S GOLAN HEIGHTS, BETWEEN
THE SYRIAN ARMY AND MILITANTS
LINKED TO AL-QAEDA.
GOVERNMENT TROOPS ARE TRYING TO
RECAPTURE A CROSSING POINT THAT
THE "NUSRA FRONT" REBELS
CAPTURED LAST WEEK.
44 U.N. PEACEKEEPERS FROM FIJI
WERE ABDUCTED IN THE AREA LAST
WEEK.
THEIR  WHEREABOUTS REMAIN
UNKNOWN.
IN NORTH KOREA, THREE AMERICAN
DETAINEES WERE ALLOWED TO SPEAK
WITH U.S. AND FOREIGN NEWS MEDIA
TODAY.
THEY APPEALED FOR A HIGH-RANKING
U.S. REPRESENTATIVE TO NEGOTIATE
THEIR RELEASE.
KENNETH BAE IS A MISSIONARY,
CONVICTED OF TRYING TO BRING
DOWN THE STATE.
HE'S SERVING 15 YEARS.
JEFFREY FOWLE AND MATTHEW MILLER
ARE  DUE TO FACE TRIAL SOON ON
SIMILAR CHARGES.
PRESIDENT OBAMA VOWED THIS LABOR
DAY TO KEEP PUSHING CONGRESS FOR
A HIGHER MINIMUM WAGE.
HE WANTS TO RAISE THE FEDERAL
MINIMUM TO $10.10 AN HOUR.
TODAY, IN MILWAUKEE, HE SAID
PERSISTENCE IS THE KEY TO
WINNING OVER CONGRESS, AND HE
JOKED THE SAME IS TRUE IN
AFFAIRS OF THE HEART.
>> THERE IS NO DENYING A SIMPLE
TRUTH: AMERICA DESERVES A RAISE.
AND I THINK EVENTUALLY, CONGRESS
IS GONNA HEAR THEM.
WE'LL BREAK THOSE FOLKS DOWN,
WE'LL JUST STAY ON THEM, WE'LL
JUST KEEP AT IT.
THAT'S HOW I GOT MICHELLE TO
MARRY ME, I JUST WORE HER DOWN.
>> Woodruff: REPUBLICANS HAVE
BLOCKED A MINIMUM WAGE INCREASE,
ON THE GROUNDS IT WILL HURT
SMALL BUSINESS AND JOB GROWTH.
STILL TO COME ON THE "NEWSHOUR."
UKRAINE PEACE TALKS RESUME AMID
ESCALATING TENSIONS ON THE
GROUND;
THE CHALLENGES FACING PART-TIME
WORKERS IN AMERICA;
VIOLENT STREET PROTESTS IN
ISLAMABAD THREATEN PAKISTAN'S
FRAGILE DEMOCRACY;
HOW SUMMER SCHOOL CAN GET MIDDLE
SCHOOL STUDENTS THINKING ABOUT
COLLEGE EARLY ON;
AND, CELEBRATING THE SPORT OF
FOOTBALL AND THE WAY IT REFLECTS
AMERICAN CULTURE.
>> Woodruff: TALKS AIMED AT
RESTORING PEACE IN UKRAINE
OPENED TODAY, WITH UKRAINE,
RUSSIA AND UKRAINIAN REBELS
TAKING PART.
THE GATHERING IN BELARUS PLAYED
OUT AGAINST THE BACKDROP OF
BATTLEFIELD GAINS BY THE REBELS.
AND AS MATT FREI OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS REPORTS, THE
PARTIES ON THE GROUND SEEM TO BE
BRACING FOR MORE CONFLICT
DESPITE THE NEW DIALOGUE.
>> Reporter: THE FIRST DAY BACK
AT SCHOOL IN UKRAINE, ALWAYS A
BIG DEAL BUT ESPECIALLY HERE IN
THE EMBATTLED EAST OF THE
COUNTRY WHERE DEFIANCE IS
MEASURED IN THE SIZE OF BOWS,
AND WHERE THE WAR ON THEIR
DOORSTEP IS DISMISSED LIKE AN
UNRULY CLASSMATE.
TEST WE SHOULD KEEP THE
CHILDREN OF UKRAINE.
WE DO NOT WANT TO SEE IT
DESTROYED.
WE WANT TO LIVE IN PEACE AND
WE WANT TO SAY TO ALL, WE
WANT TO YOU HAVE A PEACEFUL
LIFE.
FIRST DAY BACK AT SCHOOL HERE
TOO, THE SANDHURST OF UKRAINE.
IN RECENT YEARS THE ARMY HAD
BEEN AN AFTERTHOUGHT.
BUT THESE FRESH FACED RECRUITS
ARE LIKELY TO SEE ACTION ON THE
COUNTRY'S NEW EASTERN FRONT, IN
A WAR THAT AT BEST IS A CIVIL
CONFLICT AND AT WORST A REGIONAL
ONE
THE ASSUMPTION SINCE THE END OF
THE COLD WAR THAT CONFLICT IN
EUROPE WAS WELL NIGHT IMPOSSIBLE
HAS EVAPORATED IN HEAT OF A
UKRAINIAN SUMMER.
PRESIDENT POROSHENKO TODAY DID
NOT MINCE HIS WORDS.
>> DIRECT AND OPEN
AGGRESSION HAS BEEN LAUNCHED
AGAINST UKRAINE FROM A
NEIGHBORING STATE.
THIS HAS CHANGED THE
SITUATION TO RESOLVE THE
CONFLICT IN A RADICAL WAY
AND RAISES NEWER QUESTIONS
FOR THE SECURITY FORCES.
WE ARE THOROUGHLY ANALYZING
THE EVENTS OF THE LAST WEEK.
CONCLUSION LICENSE SERIOUS.
THESE ARE THE PRO RUSSIAN REBELS
TOOLED UP ALLEGEDLY BY RUSSIA
FOR ANOTHER ATTEMPT TO TAKE BACK
DONETSK AIRPORT IN THE MILITARY
PING PONG THAT HAS DEFINED THIS
LIMITED BUT INCREASINGLY VICIOUS
WAR.
THE BIG QUESTION THIS WEEK IS
WHETHER RUSSIA ITSELF IS NOW
GETTING MORE OPENLY INVOLVED,
SOMETHING WHICH MOSCOW CONTINUES
TO DENY BUT THE REST OF EUROPE
AND AMERICA INCREASINGLY
BELIEVE.
THE UKRANIANS USE THIS AS
EVIDENCE.
ON THE HORIZON A UKRAINIAN
PATROL BOAT AND THEN AN
EXPLOSION.
WAS IT RUSSIAN ARTILLERY AS KIEV
CLAIMS OR AN AIR-STRIKE?
WE DON'T KNOW, BUT THIS IS WHAT
IT LOOKED LIKE UP CLOSE AND
PERSONAL.
THE NAVAL VESSEL ABLAZE, SEVEN
CREW MEMBERS INJURED, TWO
MISSING.
THE GHOSTS OF EUROPEAN HISTORY
ARE KNOCKING ON THE DOOR IN WHAT
LOOKS AT TIMES LIKE A GRIM RE-
ENACTMENT OF THE GRIMMEST PAST.
HERE UKRAINIAN PRISONERS OF WAR
WERE PARADED IN FRONT OF PRO
RUSSIAN CIVILIANS, EXPOSED TO
ANTI UKRAINIAN ANGER.
THERE ARE THOUGHT TO BE 700
PRISONERS OF WAR NOW AND
TREATMENT LIKE THIS IS AGAINST
THE GENEVA CONVENTION.
WE DON'T KNOW THE NUMBER ON THE
OTHER SIDE BUT WE DO KNOW THAT
THE CIVILIAN POPULATION IN THE
PRO RUSSIAN AREAS IS
INCREASINGLY BECOMING PRISONER
TO UKRAINIAN ARTILLERY.
THE CELLARS OF DONETZK HAVE
BECOME BOMB SHELTERS.
A YEAR AGO SUCH SCENES WOULD
HAVE BEEN DISMISSED AS
OUTLANDISH FANTASY NOW THEY ARE
BECOME THE NEW NORMAL.
>> Woodruff: AT THE MEETING IN
MINSK TODAY, THE REBELS SOFTENED
THEIR DEMAND FOR OUTRIGHT
INDEPENDENCE.
INSTEAD, THEY OFFERED TO RESPECT
UKRAINE'S SOVEREIGNTY IN
EXCHANGE FOR A MEASURE OF
AUTONOMY.
FOR MORE ON TODAY'S
DEVELOPMENTS, I TALKED A SHORT
WHILE AGO WITH FRED WEIR OF THE
CHRISTIAN SCIENCE MONITOR IN
MOSCOW.
>> FRED WEIR, THANK YOU VERY
MUCH FOR TALKING WITH US.
BEFORE I ASK YOU ABOUT THE
DIPLOMACY, GIVE US AN UPDATE
ON THE SITUATION ON THE
GROUND.
DOES ONE SIDE OR ANOTHER NOW
HAVE CLEARLY HAVE THE UPPER
HAND?
>> WELL, YES, IT HAS SHIFTED
BACK AND FORTH OVER THE PAST
SEVERAL MONTHS.
BUT IT APPEARS THAT
UKRAINIAN ARMED FORCES
OVEREXTENDED THEMSELVES.
THEY SURROUNDED THE TWO
REBEL CAPITALS.
AND THE REBELS DID GIVE UP A
LOT OF TERRITORY.
TURNS OUT THEY WERE KIND OF
ENTICING THE UKRAINIANS INTO
A TRAP.
AND THEY APPEAR TO HAVE
ENCIRCLED SEVERAL
CONCENTRATIONS OF UKRAINIAN
FORCES.
THEY APPARENTLY HAVE TAKEN
700 PRISONERS JUST IN THE
LAST FEW DAYS.
SO AT THE MOMENT IN THAT
AREA, THAT IS THE EASTERN
PROVINCES OF DONETSK, THE
REBELS CLEARLY HAVE ITS UP
ARE HAND THERE ON THE
OFFENSIVE.
AND KIEV FORCES ARE RETREATING.
IT DOESN'T MEAN THAT THEY'RE
GO OG TO MARCH ON KIEV ANY
TIME SOON BUT THEY CERTAINLY
SEEM TO HAVE REVERSED THEIR
FORTUNES AND THEY MAY NOW BE
IN A VERY, VERY STRONG
POSITION TO BARGAIN FOR SOME
KIND OF AUTONOMY OR EVEN
INDEPENDENCE.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S WHAT
I WANTED TO ASK YOU ABOUT.
BECAUSE IT APPEARS THAT THEY
HAVE CHANGED THEIR POSITION
SOMEWHAT.
INSTEAD OF ASKING FOR
COMPLETE INDEPENDENCE, IF
LOOKS AS IF THEY'RE ASKING
FOR SOMETHING ELSE.
WHAT'S YOUR UNDERSTANDING OF
WHAT THE REBELS ARE ASKING
FOR IN THESE TALKS GOING ON
IN BELARUS?
>> WELL, IT'S VERY LIKELY
THAT THEY ARE SYNCHRONIZING
THEIR POSITION WITH MOSCOW.
I THINK THAT ITS-- IT IS
BASICALLY VLADIMIR PUTIN WHO
IS DECIDING WHAT THE END
GAME IS HERE.
AND HE DOES NOT WANT TO
INVADE UKRAINE OR AN EXIN
EASTERN UKRAINE IN OR
ANYTHING LIKE THAT.
AND SO THE REBELS NOW IN
THESE SEMI OFFICIAL TALKS
THAT ARE GOING ON IN BELARUS
AND MINSK HAVE DROPPED THEIR
DEMAND FOR FULL INDEPENDENCE
AND ARE SAYING THAT THEY
WOULD SETTLE FOR SOME KIND
OF SWEEPING AUTONOMY WHICH
WOULD GIVE THEM CONTROL OVER
THE LANGUAGE THEY USE, THE
RIGHT TO ELECT THEIR OWN
LEADERS, TO APPOINT THEIR
OWN LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICIALS.
AND MORE CRUCIALLY, TO MAKE
THEIR OWN ECONOMIC
ARRANGEMENTS.
WHICH MEANS THAT THEY WOULD
BE ABLE TO CING
WITH RUSSIA ACROSS THE
BORDER REGARDLESS MOSCOW'S
RELATIONS WITH KIEV.
AS I SAY, THEY'RE WINNING ON
THE BATTLEFIELD NOW.
IT DOES LOOK LIKE THERE WON
BE ANY MILITARY SOLUTION
WHICH WAS PLAN A IN KIEV, TO
LIBERATE THIS TERRITORY AND
RESTORE KIEV.
-- KIEV, THAT DOESN'T LOOK
SET TO HAPPEN.
SO PROBABLY NEGOTIATIONS ARE
THE ONLY WAY OUT.
>> Woodruff: AND HOW DOES
WHAT THEY'RE ASKING FOR, THE
REBELS, SQUARE WITH WHAT THE
GOVERNMENT OF UKRAINE IS
PREPARED TO DO?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, IF WE
COULD SEPARATE OURSELVES
FROM THE PASSIONS WE ALL
FEEL ABOUT WHAT'S GOING ON
THERE, IT ISN'T THAT HARD, I
THINK, TO SEE THAT UKRAINE
COULD ACCEPT MOSCOW'S
CONDITIONS.
I DON'T MEAN THAT THEY WOULD
LIKE TO BE DICTATED TO BY
MOSCOW BUT MOSCOW'S
CONDITIONS ARE BASICALLY,
UKRAINE MUST BE NONALIGNED.
NEVER JOIN NATO.
TWO, RUSSIAN LANGUAGE SHOULD
HAVE OFFICIAL STATUS IN
UKRAINE, PARTICULARLY IN
EASTERN UKRAINE.
AND THIRD, THERE IS THIS
SWEEPING AUTONOMY FOR THE
EASTERN PROVINCES.
>> Woodruff: RIGHT.
>> THOSE ARE NOT THAT HARD
TO LIVE WITH.
IT WOULD BE SOME KIND OF
STATUS LIKE SAY FINLAND HAD
DURING THE COLD WAR, OR
SOMETHING, WHICH IS WHAT
MOSCOWS I THINK SEES AS THE
END GAME.
>> Woodruff: SO IS THE
THINKING THAT THERE COULD BE
AN ACCOMMODATION HERE?
>> WELL, IF NEITHER SIDE CAN
ACTUALLY WIN ON THE
BATTLEFIELD, THEN WHAT IS
THE ALTERNATIVES?
THEY CAN'T GO ON BLEEDING
THEMSELVES THE WAY THEY ARE.
UKRAINE'S ECONOMY IS IMPLODED.
THERE HAS TO BE, THIS HAS TO
BREAK SOMEHOW.
AND IF EVER THERE WAS AN
OPENING FOR DIPLOMACY AND
FOR SOME KIND OF COMPROMISE
TO SETTLE, I THINK THAT
WOULD PROBABLY BE NOW.
>> FRED WEIR WITH THE
CHRISTIAN SCIENCE MONITOR
REPORTSING IN MOSCOW.
WE THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: NOW TO A LABOR DAY
STORY ABOUT THE CHANGING NATURE
OF THE JOB MARKET IN THIS
COUNTRY.
AS WORKERS SEEK MORE FLEXIBILITY
IN THEIR HOURS, AND EMPLOYERS
SEEK MORE CONTROL OVER LABOR
COSTS, THE NUMBER OF PART TIME
JOBS IS SOARING.
NEWSHOUR ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT
PAUL SOLMAN LOOKS AT SOME OF THE
CONSEQUENCES.
IT'S ALL PART OF HIS ONGOING
REPORTING, "MAKING SENSE" OF
FINANCIAL NEWS.
>> Reporter: NEARLY 11:00 ON A
SATURDAY NIGHT, AND 24-YEAR-OLD
ONIEKA O'KIEFFE IS LEAVING THE
BROOKLYN APARTMENT SHE SHARES
WITH HER MOTHER, SISTER AND ONE-
YEAR-OLD NIECE FOR MANHATTAN.
IT'S AN HOUR-LONG TRIP, BETWEEN
THE WALK TO THE SUBWAY STATION
AND THEN THREE TRAIN RIDES TO
MIDTOWN.
BUT O'KIEFFE ISN'T GOING TO A
PARTY OR PUB.
SHE'S HEADING TO WORK, TO GET
HER PART-TIME SCHEDULE FOR THE
COMING WEEK, AND SHE MIGHT BE ON
THE SUNDAY MIDNIGHT SHIFT, WHICH
BEGINS IN AN HOUR.
>> I'M NOT SURE IF I'M WORKING,
SO I'M GOING TO GO THERE AND SEE
MY SCHEDULE, AND IF I HAVE TO
WORK AT LEAST I'M READY.
>> Reporter: O'KIEFFE WORKS THE
GRAVEYARD SHIFT IN THE STOCKROOM
AT AMERICAN EAGLE IN TIMES
SQUARE, EARNING $8 AN HOUR, HER
CHOICE, SHE SAYS, SO THAT THIS
JOB WON'T INTERFERE WITH HER
OTHER PART-TIME GIG, A DAY SHIFT
IN THE STOCKROOM AT CROCS SHOES
IN HERALD SQUARE.
BETWEEN THE TWO PART-TIME JOBS,
O'KIEFFE WORKED 60 HOURS THE
PRIOR WEEK.
ON AUGUST 6th, SHE'D GONE TO THE
ER WITH 104-DEGREE FEVER.
>> WITH THE LACK OF SLEEP AND
NOT ENOUGH TIME TO TAKE CARE OF
MYSELF MY IMMUNE SYSTEM WAS
COMPROMISED AND I GOT SICK.
EVERYONE TELLS ME THAT IT'S NOT
GOOD FOR YOU TO LIKE OVEREXERT
YOURSELF TO THAT DEGREE, BUT
LIKE THE MONEY'S NECESSARY, FOR
RENT, UTILITIES AND THINGS LIKE
THAT.
>> Reporter: WHILE MORE
AMERICANS ARE NOW EMPLOYED THAN
BEFORE THE DOWNTURN BEGAN,
O'KIEFFE REPRESENTS ONE OF THE
MOST STARTLING STATISTICS OF THE
POST-GREAT RECESSION PERIOD:
THREE MILLION MORE PART-TIME
WORKERS WHO REPORT THAT THEY
WANT FULL-TIME JOBS BUT CAN'T
FIND THEM.
THE TOTAL IS UP BY MORE THAN 50%
SINCE 2007.
WHY THE PART-TIME EXPLOSION?
BECAUSE SO MANY WOULD-BE FULL-
TIMERS ARE COMPETING FOR THE
SAME JOBS, AND HAVE TO TAKE WHAT
BUSINESSES OFFER.
AND, SAYS M.I.T. BUSINESS
PROFESSOR ZEYNEP TON.
>> THE DOMINANT VIEW IN BUSINESS
IS TO SEE LABOR AS A COST TO BE
MINIMIZED AND PAY EMPLOYEES AS
LITTLE AS POSSIBLE.
>> Reporter: SO COMPANIES HIRE
PART-TIME, AND USE THE LATEST
COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY TO GET
MAXIMUM EFFICIENCY FROM EVERY
PART-TIMER, WITH SCHEDULING
SOFTWARE THAT PROGRAMS WORKERS
AS INTERCHANGEABLE PARTS.
>>S OF
CUSTOMERS, SOMETIMES THERE ARE A
FEW CUSTOMERS.
AND THEY CAN MEASURE THIS IN AS
SHORT AS 15 MINUTE INCREMENTS
NOW WITH TECHNOLOGY.
SO THEIR VIEW IS: WHY DON'T WE
MATCH THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE THAT
WE HAVE AS CLOSELY AS POSSIBLE
TO CUSTOMER TRAFFIC?
THAT WAY, WHEN CUSTOMERS ARE
THERE WE CAN SERVE THEM BETTER
AND WHEN THEY'RE NOT THERE WE
DON'T HAVE ANYBODY IDLE,
STANDING AD
>> MAKES SENSE.
HOWEVER, WHEN THE MINDSET IS TO
SEE LABOR AS COST TO BE
MINIMIZED, RETAILERS AND LOTS OF
OTHER COMPANIES FIND THEMSELVES
IN A VICIOUS CYCLE.
AND THIS VICIOUS CYCLE IS
DOWNRIGHT BRUTAL FOR EMPLOYEES.
>> THESE ARE FROM REPETITIVE
STRAIN INJURIES.
>> Reporter: STARBUCKS BARISTA
LIBERTY LOCKE IS IN HAND-
SPLINTS, THE RESULT, SHE SAYS,
OF TRYING TO SUPPLEMENT HER 20
SCHEDULED HOURS THE PRIOR WEEK
WITH ENOUGH ADDITIONAL SHIFTS TO
GET BY.
>> YOU NEVER CAN FIND IT SPREAD
OUT AS A REGULAR PERSON WOULD
WORK YOU KNOW?
IT'S, YOU END UP JUST HAVING TO
TAKE WHAT YOU CAN.
SO I DID A 12-HOUR SHIFT ONE DAY
AND 11 HOURS THE NEXT DAY AND BY
THE END BOTH ARMS WERE JUST SO
CRAMPED UP I COULD BARELY CLOSE
MY HANDS.
>> Reporter: LOCKE, WHO'S BEEN
AT STARBUCKS EIGHT YEARS, SAYS
SHE'S SEEN THE ADVENT OF
"OPTIMAL SCHEDULING."
>> WHEN I WAS HIRED, MANAGERS
WOULD BE FIRED IF THEY WEREN'T
PUTTING OUT SCHEDULES THREE
WEEKS IN ADVANCE, BUT NOW IT'S
EVERY WEEK AND I BELIEVE IT'S
THE NEW AUTOMATIC SYSTEM ONLY
ALLOWS THEM TO DO A WEEK IN
ADVANCE, BUT WE'RE REQUIRED TO
GIVE SIX MONTHS IN ADVANCE OF
AVAILABILITY OF WHEN WE'RE
AVAILABLE TO WORK.
>> Reporter: MOREOVER, SHE SAYS,
BARISTAS WANTING TO WORK AT
LEAST 32 HOURS A WEEK HAVE TO
MAKE THEMSELVES AVAILABLE 70% OF
THE HOURS THE STORE IS OPEN.
>> THIS STORE IS ONLY CLOSED
THREE HOURS OUT OF THE DAY.
SO IT MAKES YOU HAVE TO BE
AVAILABLE FOR OVER A HUNDRED
HOURS IN THE HOPES OF GETTING
32.
SO IT MAKES IT EXTREMELY
IMPOSSIBLE TO GO TO SCHOOL,
IMPOSSIBLE TO WORK A SECOND JOB.
>> Reporter: STARBUCKS'
SCHEDULING PRACTICES, AND THE
HAVOC THEY CAN WREAK ON WORKERS,
WERE HIGHLIGHTED IN A RECENT NEW
YORK TIMES ARTICLE ABOUT SAN
DIEGO BARISTA JANNETTE NAVARRO,
A SINGLE MOTHER WHOSE LIFE WAS
FALLING APART LARGELY BECAUSE OF
HER ERRATIC WORK SCHEDULE.
ALMOST IMMEDIATELY, STARBUCKS
PRESIDENT CLIFF BURROWS
ANNOUNCED A CHANGE OF POLICY:
>> WE WILL WORK QUICKLY TO
UPDATE TO OUR SCHEDULING
SOFTWARE TO GIVE STORE MANAGERS
GREATER ABILITY TO PROVIDE
STABILITY AND CONSISTENCY IN
SCHEDULES WEEK-TO-WEEK FOR OUR
PARTNERS.
>> Reporter: BUT STARBUCKS IS
FAR FROM THE ONLY COMPANY USING
SO CALLED "JUST IN TIME"
SCHEDULING SOFTWARE.
AND SOME RETAILERS GO A STEP
FURTHER, SAYS UNION
REPRESENTATIVE JANNA PEA, WITH
"ON CALL" SCHEDULING.
>> YOU HAVE TO BE AVAILABLE TO
WORK, BUT IF THEY CALL YOU AND
SAY, "WE DON'T NEED YOU," YOU
DON'T GET PAID, MAKING YOURSELF
AVAILABLE FOR WHAT YOU THOUGHT
WOULD HAVE BEEN A SHIFT OF
MONEY.
THAT IS THE KICKER AND THAT IS
WHAT'S MOST UNFORTUNATE.
ON-CALL ALONG WITH JUST-IN-TIME
SCHEDULING BECAUSE THE WORKERS
LITERALLY NEED TO BE AVAILABLE
AT THE SNAP OF THE RETAILER.
>> Reporter: MELODY PABON BECAME
FED UP ENOUGH TO QUIT.
A CASHIER AT ZARA IN MIDTOWN
MANHATTAN, SHE ASKED NOT TO WORK
WEEKENDS, WHEN IT WAS HARDEST TO
FIND AFFORDABLE CHILD CARE.
SO INSTEAD, SHE WAS OFTEN
ASSIGNED TO CLOSE ON WEEKNIGHTS,
PUTTING HER BACK HOME IN
BROOKLYN PAST MIDNIGHT.
SOMETIMES SHE DIDN'T SEE HER
FOUR-YEAR-OLD MASON FOR DAYS.
>> MY SON IS WELL MANNERED FOR
HIS AGE, BUT WORKING THOSE HOURS
I STARTED TO NOTICE, THE WHINING
AND THE CRYING AND TEMPER
TANTRUMS HERE AND THERE WHICH
THAT'S SOMETHING HE RARELY DID.
SO I WAS LIKE, YOU KNOW WHAT?
THIS IS ACTUALLY TAKING A TOLL
ON HIM AS WELL.
>> Reporter: WHEN SHE ASKED FOR
FURTHER ACCOMMODATION, SHE SAYS
HER HOURS STARTED TO DWINDLE.
SO WHEN THE STORE CLOSED FOR
RENOVATION LAST MONTH AND PABON
WAS GIVEN THE CHOICE OF A
TRANSFER OR A LAYOFF, SHE OPTED
FOR THE LATTER, AND THE RELATIVE
SECURITY OF A REGULAR
UNEMPLOYMENT CHECK.
>> AM I GONNA BE PLAYING
JUGGLING WITH MY MONEY, AND WORK
TWO DAYS A WEEK, THREE DAYS A
WEEK, FOUR DAYS A WEEK NOT
KNOWING?
ESPECIALLY IF IT'S ONLY MAYBE A
FEW DAYS IN ADVANCE AND I HAVE
RENT TO PAY.
I CAN'T DO THAT.
>> Reporter: THE PROBLEM, SAYS
BUSINESS PROFESSOR TON, IS THAT
IN SQUEEZING EMPLOYEES,
COMPANIES ARE SHOOTING
THEMSELVES IN THE FOOT.
>> WHEN YOU SEE LABOR AS JUST A
COST TO BE MINIMIZED, THE
OUTCOME OF THAT IS HIGH EMPLOYEE
TURNOVER, ABSENTEEISM, BAD
MORALE, BAD CUSTOMER SERVICE,
OPERATIONAL PROBLEMS, LOW SALES
AND LOW PROFITS.
WHEN SALES ARE LOW THEN LABOR
BUDGETS ARE REDUCED.
INUES.IS VICIOUS CYCLE
>> Reporter: SO WHY DO THEY DO
IT?
>> EXCELLENCE IS A LOT HARDER TO
ACHIEVE THAN MEDIOCRITY.
>> Reporter: NOW NO COMPANY
WOULD SPEAK TO US ABOUT THIS.
BUT MOLLIE LOMBARDI, A "HUMAN
CAPITAL MANAGEMENT" CONSULTANT
SAYS THE SOFTWARE ITSELF IS NOT
NEFARIOUS, BECAUSE WITHOUT IT.
>> MANAGERS END UP SPENDING A
LOT OF TIME IN THE BACK ROOM,
SORT OF LOOKING AT BITS AND
PIECES OF PAPER OF PEOPLE'S
VACATION REQUESTS, LOOKING AT
DELIVERY SCHEDULES, TRYING TO
FIND THE BALANCE BETWEEN THERIGE
RIGHT NUMBER OF SLOTS AVAILABLE
>> Reporter: BUT, LOMBARDI SAYS:
>> IF A MANAGER IS TOLD: YOU
NEED TO OPERATE AT THE LEAST
LABOR COST POSSIBLE, THEY MAY
TAKE THAT TO HEART A LITTLE TOO
LITERALLY AND START TO SCHEDULE
DOWN TO BARE BONES AND ACTUALLY
NOT BE DELIVERING THE CUSTOMER
EXPERIENCE OR THE EMPLOYEE
EXPERIENCE THAT THE COMPANY
WANTS.
>> Reporter: MEANWHILE, ONIEKA
O'KIEFFE DID HAVE TO WORK AT
AMERICAN EAGLE ON SUNDAY,
MIDNIGHT TO 6 A.M.
>> I CAN'T COMPLAIN CAUSE IT'S
HOURS BUT I WAS HOPING TO HAVE
TODAY OFF.
>> Reporter: THEN 7:00 A.M. TO
NOON AT CROCS, BACK TO AMERICAN
EAGLE AT MIDNIGHT ON MONDAY, AND
ON TO CROCS FOR THE NOON TO 8:00
P.M. SHIFT.
AND SO IT WENT LAST WEEK, UNTIL
SHE'D PUT IN 24 HOURS AT
AMERICAN EAGLE, 33.5 AT CROCS.
57.5 HOURS IN ALL.
>> IT'S BEEN EXTREMELY
DIFFICULT, MORE SO THAN I
IMAGINED.
I WOULD LIKE A FULL TIME JOB,
BUT I REALIZE THEY'RE VERY FEW
AND FAR BETWEEN.
YOU GOTTA DO WHAT YOU GOTTA DO.
>> Woodruff: ONLINE YOU CAN FIND
PAUL'S EXTENDED CONVERSATION
WITH ZEYNEP TON, AUTHOR OF "THE
GOOD JOBS STRATEGY," ON OUR
"MAKING SENSE" PAGE.
WE TURN NOW TO ANOTHER TAKE ON
TODAY'S ECONOMIC PICTURE.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THAT STORY.
>> Brown: FOR MANY MONTHS NOW,
THE NUMBER OF NEW JOBS CREATED
HAS RISEN, AND THE JOBLESS RATE
HAS FALLEN SUBSTANTIALLY.
ALL PART OF WHAT LOOKS LIKE A
SLOW BUT STEADY RECOVERY.
BUT A NEW STUDY FINDS THAT
AMERICANS ARE HARDLY UPBEAT.
71% SAY THEY BELIEVE THE ECONOMY
HAS PERMANENTLY CHANGED FOR THE
WORSE.
AND THAT'S COMPARED TO 49% WHO
THOUGHT SO JUST AFTER THE
ECONOMIC CRISIS HAD HIT.
POLITICAL SCIENTIST CLIFF ZUKIN
OF RUTGERS UNIVERSITY WORKED ON
THE SURVEY, AND JOINS US NOW.
WELCOME, LET'S START WITH
THE BIG PICTURE.
THIS IDEA THAT MORE PEOPLE
FEEL THERE'S BEEN
DAMAGE NOW THAN EVEN A FEW
YEARS RIGHT AFTER THE
RECOVERY.
THEY'RE MORE PESSIMISTIC
NOW?
>> THEY'RE MORE PESSIMISTIC
NOW.
I THINK THEY'RE UNHAPPY AND
I THINK THEY'RE ANXIOUS.
WHAT HE WITH FOUND WAS THAT
THE NOTION THAT THERE'S BEEN
A PERMANENT CHANGE IN THE
ECONOMY HAS GROWN, NOT
RECEDE AS WE'VE NOW HIT
ALMOST FIVE YEARS OF
CONTINUOUS GROWTH.
AND THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING
THIS IS IT'S JUST NOT
SHOWING UP IN THEIR PERSONAL
LIFE.
>> WELL, THAT'S WHAT I
WANTED TO ASK YOU.
WHAT KIND OF EXPERIENCES ARE
THEY POINTING TO?
>> WELL, THEY'RE POINTING TO
WHAT THEY HAVE IN SAVINGS
AND SALARY.
AND THINGS THAT HAVE CHANGED
AROUND THEM.
SO THEY HAVE NOW 42% SAY
THEY HAVE LESS IN SAVINGS
AND SALARY NOW THAN THEY DID
FIVE YEARS AGO.
AND THEY SAY THAT THEIR
CURRENT ECONOMIC STATUS FOR
THREE OUT OF FIVE OF THEM IS
EITHER FAIR OR POOR.
AND SO THEY'VE HAD SOME
DIMINUTION OF QUALITY OF
LIFE.
WE ASKED TWO QUESTIONS THAT
ALLOW US TO TRY AND FRAME
THIS.
WHETHER THEY HAVE HAD A
MAJOR OR MINOR CHANGE IN THE
QUALITY OF THEIR LIFE.
AND WHETHER IT'S BEEN
TEMPORARY OR PERMANENT.
AND WE HAVE ONE-THIRD IN THE
COUNTRY, SO THAT'S 80
MILLION PEOPLE, WHO SAY
THERE HAS BEEN A PERMANENT
IMPACT OR THEIR QUALITY OF
LIFE.
EITHER MAJOR OR MINOR.
SO WHATEVER HAS HAPPENED IN
THE STOCK MARKET AND OTHER
INDICATORS IS NOT GETTING
THROUGH TO MAIN STREET AT
ALL.
PEOPLE ARE STRUGGLING AND
THERE'S BEEN NO LETUP REALLY
IN THE LAST FIVE YEARS.
>> AND DID THAT PESSIMISTIC
CUT ACROSS BOTH CLASS,
ETHNIC LINES, GEOGRAPHY AS
MUCH AS YOU COULD TELL?
>> YEAH, ABSOLUTELY.
I MEAN I THINK YOU CAN CALL
IT A GENERALIZED SORT OF
MALAISE AND UP SET.
IT'S SO PERVASIVE THAT IT
IS-- IT DOESN'T BREAK BY THE
USUAL DEMOGRAPHICS.
BECAUSE IT EFFECTS PRETTY
MUCH EVERYBODY.
>> Brown: THERE WAS ALSO A
NEGATIVE PORTRAIT OF THE
AMERICAN WORKER BY AND LARGE
AS WELL AS UNHAPPY.
I MEANS THAT'S ONE WAY TO
JUST LOOK AT IT GENERALLY.
>> WELL, ONE OF THE THINGS
WE WANTED TO DO FOR LABOR
DAY WAS TO TAKE A SNAPSHOT
OF HOW AMERICANS VIEW THE
AMERICAN WORKER.
SO WE GAVE THEM 12
ADJECTIVES AND ASKED THEM TO
CHECK OFF THINGS THAT THEY
THOUGHT FIT VERY WELL.
AND LOIS WAS HAPPY AT 14%,
WELL PAID, CAME IN THE NEXT
LOWEST AT 18.
TWO THAT CAME IN THE HIGHEST
ARE FEARFUL OR INSECURE IN
THEIR JOBS.
AND THEN HIGHLY STRESSED IN
THEIR WORK.
ONE OF THE INTERESTING
THINGS WAS THE PICTURE OF
THE AMERICAN WORKER IS NOT
AT ALL ATTRACTIVE OR WHAT WE
MY THINK.
ONLY 20% SAY THAT THEY'RE
INNOVATIVE.
ONLY 30% AMBITIOUS.
ONLY A QUARTER SAY THAT
THEY'RE WELL EDUCATED.
AND I THINK THE STATISTIC
THAT SURPRISED US THE MOST
OUT OF ALL OF THIS IS JUST
ONE IN THREE SAID THE
AMERICAN WORKER IS BETTER
THAN WORKERS IN OTHER
COUNTRIES.
>> Brown: THERE WAS SOME NEW
GALLOP-- GALLUP POLLING
SUGGESTSING WITH WAGES
STARTING TO CREEP UP A
LITTLE BIT THERE WAS SOME
NEW CONFIDENCE IN THE
ECONOMY.
DID YOU SEE ANY SIGNS OF
HOPEFULNESS?
>> NOT REALLY.
I MEAN WE HAVE THE SAME
NUMBER OF GALLUP WHEN I
ASKED WORKERS IF THEY ARE
SATISFIED WITH THEIR OWN
JOBS.
BUT WHEN THE FOCUS IS ON THE
ECONOMY, THE U.S. ECONOMY AS
A WHOLE, ONLY ONE-THIRD TELL
US THAT IT'S GOTTEN BETTER
IN THE LAST YEAR.
AND ONLY ONE QUARTER THINK
IT'S GOING TO GET BETTER
NEXT YEAR.
IT'S VERY, VERY HARD TO GO
THROUGH THE NUMBERS THAT WE
WENT THROUGH AND FIND A LOT
OF ENCOURAGEMENT OR UPSIDE.
>> LET ME ASK YOU BRIEFLY,
FINALLY, YOUR POLITICAL
SCIENTIST, DID YOU SEE A
DIRECT POLITICAL IMPACT IN
TERMS OF WHO PEOPLE BLAME
FOR ALL OF THIS?
>> WELL, I THINK THEY BLAME
PARTLY FOR WORKERS, PARTLY
JUST THE ECONOMY, BUT THEY
CERTAINLY ARE NOT ENAMOURED
WITH GOVERNMENT.
WE ASKED THEM HOW MUCH
CONFIDENCE THEY HAD IN
WASHINGTON'S ABILITY TO
SOLVE PROBLEMS.
JUST 2% SAID A LOT.
ANOTHER 20% SAID SOME.
IF THEY HAD TO CHOOSE
BETWEEN PRESIDENT OBAMA OR
THE REPUBLICANS IN CONGRESS,
TO HANDLE THE ECONOMY, THEY
SAID NEITHER OF THE ABOVE AT
40%.
AND THEY DON'T THINK
UNEMPLOYMENT GOING TO GET
BETTER EVEN IF THE
REPUBLICANS TAKE BOTH HOUSES
OF CONGRESS IN THE FALL.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WELL, NOT A PRETTY PICTURE
FOR THIS LABOR DAY.
CLIFF ZUKIN OF RUTGERS
UNIVERSITY, THANKS SOME OF.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Woodruff: THE RECENT UNREST
IN PAKISTAN ESCALATED AGAIN
TODAY AS PROTESTERS TEMPORARILY
TOOK CONTROL OF STATE
BROADCASTING FACILITIES.
WE HAVE A REPORT NARRATED BY
JONATHAN SPARKS OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION N
>> Reporter: THE BATTLE RAGED ON
CONSTITUTIONAL AVENUE TODAY,
POLICE AND PROTESTERS MOVING
BACK AND FORTH, SEIZING GROUND
IN PAKISTAN'S CAPITAL, THEN
CEDING IT.
HERE THE POLICE TAKE FLIGHT,
PURSUED BY THOUSANDS OF
DEMONSTRATORS, CARRYING STICKS
AND STONES AND SLINGSHOTS.
THE TROUBLE BROKE OUT ON
SATURDAY WHEN THEY TRIED TO
STORM THE RESIDENCE OF THE PRIME
ISTER NAWAZ SHARIF.
HE'S ACCUSED OF ELECTORAL FRAUD
AND THE PROTESTERS WANT HIM OUT.
A SENSE OF CRISIS, AMPLIFIED BY
PAKISTAN'S ENERGETIC NEWS
CHANNELS.
AND ONE STATION FOUND ITSELF IN
THE FIRING LINE TODAY.
THE STATE BROADCASTER, PAKISTAN
TV, WAS OVER-RUN BY 300-ODD
PROTESTERS.
THEY MARCHED INTO THE
TRANSMISSION ROOM AND CUT THE
WIRES, TAKING TWO CHANNELS OFF
THE AIR.
>> PROTESTERS HAVE MANAGED TO
BARGE THEIR WAY INTO P.T.V.
HEADQUARTERS AND THEY'VE EVEN
MADE THEIR WAY INTO SOME OF THE
NEWSROOMS AND THEY'RE ARMED WITH
STICKS AND BATONS AND THE
IMPORTANT THING IS THAT WE
REMAIN CALM RIGHT NOW, THERE'S
NO REASON TO PANIC AT THIS
STAGE.
>> Reporter: THE SITUATION WAS
DIFFUSED BY THE ARMY, A SIGN OF
THEIR STRENGTH.
SOLDIERS WALKED INTO THE STATION
AND ASKED THE PROTESTERS TO GO.
THIS AFTERNOON, THE LEADERS OF
THE PROTESTS TRIED TO DISTANCE
THEMSELVES FROM THE RAID.
FORMER CRICKETER IMRAM KHAN SAID
HE WAS SORRY IF ANY OF HIS
FOLLOWERS WERE INVOLVED, WHILE
THE CLERIC TAHIR AL-QADRI
ASSURED THE NATION IT HAD
NOTHING TO DO WITH HIM.
BOTH MEN COMMAND THOUSANDS OF
SUPPORTERS, BUT THAT'S NOT
ENOUGH TO SWEEP THE GOVERNMENT
FROM POWER.
THEY NEED THE MILITARY'S HELP TO
FORCE NAWAZ SHARIF TO RESIGN.
THE COUNTRY'S ALL-POWERFUL ARMY
CHIEF RAHIL SHARIF HAS SOUNDED
DIPLOMATIC SO FAR, BUT THE
RELATIONS WITH THE PRIME
MINISTER, WHO HE MET WITH THIS
AFTERNOON, ARE THOUGHT TO BE
TENSE.
THE ARMY UNHAPPY WITH A NUMBER
OF GOVERNMENT POLICIES.
THEY DON'T WANT CLOSER RELATIONS
WITH INDIA OR THE PROSECUTION OF
FORMER ARMY CHIEF PEREZ
MUSHARRAF.
AND AS THE CRISIS CONTINUES,
THEY MAY EXACT A HEAVY PRICE.
>> Woodruff: TO HELP US BETTER
UNDERSTAND WHAT ALL THESE
DEVELOPMENTS MEAN FOR PAKISTAN,
WE ARE JOINED BY HUSSAIN
HAQQANI.
HE WAS PAKISTAN'S AMBASSADOR TO
WASHINGTON FROM 2008 TO 2011.
HE'S NOW DIRECTOR FOR SOUTH AND
CENTRAL ASIA AT THE HUDSON
INSTITUTE.
HIS LATEST BOOK IS "MAGNIFICENT
DELUSIONS: PAKISTAN, THE UNITED
STATES, AND AN EPIC HISTORY OF
MISUNDERSTANDING."
AND MOEED YUSUF IS THE DIRECTOR
OF SOUTH ASIA PROGRAMS AT THE
U.S. INSTITUTE OF PEACE.
HE JUST RETURNED FROM A TRIP TO
PAKISTAN.
WE WELCOME YOU BOTH TO THE
PROGRAM.
PRIME MINISTER SHARIF HAS
BEEN IN OFFICE OVER A YEAR
WHAT IS BEHIND ALL THESE
PROTESTS.
>> WELL, WHAT WE HAVE
ESSENTIALLY IS SEVERAL
CHARACTERS IN THE PAKISTANI
PLAY WANTING EVERYTHING
ACCORDING TO THEIR SCRIPT
AND NOT WILLING TO
COMPROMISE.
THE MILITARY DOES NOT WANT
THE CIVILIAN GOVERNMENT TO
BE ABLE TO CHANGE POLICIES,
ESPECIALLY IN RELATION TO
INDIA.
THEY ALSO WANT GENERAL MUSH
ARIVE TO BE RELEASED WITHOUT
BEING TRIED FOR TREASON.
MR. SHARIF CLIFFS CRITICAL
POSITIONS TO PEOPLE CLOSE TO
HIM BY FAMILY TIE.
SO EVEN THOUGH HE IS
DEMOCRATICALLY ELECTED, NOT
REALLY ACTED LIKE A
DEMOCRAT.
AND THEN WE HAVE SPOILERS
LIKE MR. IMRAM KHAN WHO
BELIEVES HE SHOULD BE PRIME
MINISTER, EXCEPT FOR A CULT
LIKE FOLLOWING HE DOESN'T
SEEM TO HAVE THE STRENGTH TO
WIN AN ELECTION.
IT'S A BIT LIKE AL GORE
COMING 14 MONTHS AFTER THE
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION AND
SAYING OH, AND BY THE WAY,
THAT PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION
WAS RIGGED.
SO I AM GOING TO PROTEST IN
FRONT OF THE WHITE HOUSE AND
OCCUPY IT FORCIBLY.
>> Woodruff: SO IT SOUNDS
LOOK A NUMBER OF DIFFERENT
FORCES AT PLAY.
MOEED YUSUF, THE ARMY IS
PART OF THIS BUT THEY ARE
NOT OWE VERTLY LEADING THESE
PROTESTS.
>> THEY ARE NOT AND I DON'T
THINK THEY WILL.
THIS IS ONE MOMENT IN
PAKISTAN'S HISTORY WHERE AN
O VERDICT COUP, NO ONE IS
REALLY SERIOUSLY
CONTEMPLATING THAT AT THIS
POINT.
THE MILITARY HAS PUT THE
CIVILIANERNMENT ON THE
BACK FOOT AND THEY ARE VERY
MUCH IN THE MIX.
PEOPLE ARE TALKING ABOUT THE
POSSIBILITY OF A COUP.
I WOULD SAY WHEN THEY ASK
THE MILITARY AS THE
GOVERNMENT DID TO COME IN
AND MEDIATE BETWEEN TWO
POLITICAL RIVALS, YOU'VE
ALREADY GIVEN THEM THE
FRONTSEAT.
AND THE SOFT COUP HAS
HAPPENED AS WE SPEAK.
AND SO THE MILITARY IS TO
THE GOING TO GO ANY FARTHER.
THEY'VE GOT WHAT THEY NEED.
>> Woodruff: SO IS THIS
SOMETHING, MR. AMBASSADOR,
THAT'S BEEN BUILDING FOR A
LONG TIME?
WAS THERE SOMETHING THAT --
>> NOT REALLY.
>> Woodruff: SOMETHINGED
THAT WHANGED DID --
>> THERE ARE MANY PEOPLE
WHETHER YOU INCLUDING OF
MR. IMRAM KHAN'S PARTY WHO
SAY SOME PEOPLE IN THE
MILITARY HAVE GIVEN A WINK
AND NOD TO ORCHESTRATE THIS.
WHICH VAL BAD FOR PAKISTAN
IT MEANS AN ELECTED PRIME
MINISTER WHO WINS AN
ELECTION WITH MILLIONS OF
VOTES CAN ACTUALLY BE MADE A
VIRTUALLY INFECTIONIVE
LEADER WITH A FEW THOUSAND
PEOPLE DEMONSTRATING AGAINST
IT AND HOLDING A SIT-IN.
AND I AGREE WITH MOEED THAT
THE MILITARY IS UNLIKELY TO
TAKE OVER.
IT DOESN'T WANT TO TAKE
OVER.
BUT WHAT IT HAS DONE IS IT
HAS DONE A NONCOUP COUP
MEANING NOT A PERING TO TAKE
POWER DIRECTLY BUT TRYING TO
TAKE OVER POLICY.
AND THAT IS WHERE THE
NFION IS REALLY
COMING FROM.
>> Woodruff: MOEED YUSUF,
WHERE IS THE PUBLIC WITH ALL
OF THIS.
IS THE PUBLIC WITH THE
MILITARY W MR. SHARIF OR
SOMEONE ELSE?
>> THAT'S A GOOD QUESTION.
I SPENT ABOUT TWO WEEKS
FOLLOWING THIS VERY CLICKL
CLICKLY-- CLOSELY INCLUDING
BEING AT THE PROTESTS.
THE INTERESTING PART THERE
WERE ABOUT 70, 80,000 PEOPLE
ON THE STREETS IN ISLAMABAD.
THAT'S NEITHER HERE FOR
THERE FOR A COUNTRY OF 180
MILLION.
THE REAL CITY IS THERE IS A
LOT OF LAT ENT SYMPATHY FOR
THESE PROTESTS AND
PROTESTORS WHEN YOU TALK TO
PEOPLE IN DRAWING ROOMS, ON
THE STREETS OR WHEN YOU
LISTEN MEDIA.
BUT THAT'S NOT LINKED TO
WHAT THESE PEOPLE ARE ASKS
FOR WHICH IS ELECTION
RIGGING AND RE-ELECTION.
THAT'S REALLY BUILT AROUND
THE SITUATION OF THE COUNTRY,
PEOPLE THINKING THAT THE
GOVERNMENT HASN'T DELIVERED
ON GOVERNANCE COUNTS,
POVERTY, ET CETERA.
SO ALL OF THAT IS BEING CON
PLATED NOW AND PEOPLE ARE
VALUE-- RALLYING THE CROWDS
TO SAY THINGS ARE REALLY BAD,
WE NEED TO GET RID OF THE
GOVERNMENT THAT IS WHERE THE
SYMPATHY IS COMING FROM,
THAT IS WHY THE GOVERNMENT
IS ON THE BECOME FOOT EVEN
WITH ONLY 70,000 FEEL ON THE
STREET.
>> AND THERE IS NO EVIDENCE
THAT THE GENERAL PUBLIC
SUPPORTS THE PROTEST.
I THINK THAT THE TELEVISION
CHANNEL THAT ACTUALLY
ENCOURAGE PEOPLE, INCITE
THEM AND SAY WHY AREN'T YOU
COMING OUT IT IT LOOKS VERY
ORCHESTRATED.
IT'S NOT LIKE THE WHOLE
COUNTRY IS BROKEN DOWN AND
EVERYBODY DECIDED WE HATE
THIS GOVERNMENT.
IF THERE IS AN ELECTION HELD
TOMORROW, I THINK THE
RESULTS WILL STILL BE A
MEXED PARLIAMENT
COMPROMISING DIFFERENT
POLITICAL PARTIES.
WHAT IS HAPPENING IS A
CLASSIC EXAMPLE OF
INTRANSIGENT POLITICAL
ACTORS TRYING TO INSIST THAT
THEY WILL GET THROUGH STREET
FRO TESTS AND A COMBINATION
OF CONSPIRACIES WHAT THEY
COULD NOT GET THROUGH IN
ELECTION.
>> Woodruff: SO WHAT WOULD
HAPPEN THEN FURX DON'T I
HAVE CHANGE OF LEADER, IF
YOU DON'T HAVE MR. SHARIF
OUT AND SOMEONE ELSE IN,
WHAT DO YOU HAVE?
>> LOOK, WHAT I CAN TELL SU
MR. SHARIF IS NOT LEAVING
WITHOUT A FIGHT.
HE'S NOT GOING ANYWHERE.
I CAN ALSO TELL YOU PEOPLE
CLOSE TO IMRAM KHAN TELL US
HE ASK NOT GOING TO GIVE UP
ON THE DEMAND FOR
RESIGNATION.
SO WHAT ARE YOU LOOKING FOR
AT THIS POINT IS MORE
VIOLENCE, MORE DRAGGING OUT
AND THE MILITARY
ULTLY-- ULTIMATELY BLOWING
THE WHISTLE AND DECIDE WHO
THEY ARE GOING TO BACK.
WHICH WHAT IMRAM KHAN SAYS
HE HAS WANTED FROM DAY ONE,
TALKING ABOUT A THIRD EMPIRE
MAKING --
>> THAT IS SOMETHING HE MADE
THAT LATER BUT HE DEFINITELY
HAS BEEN TALKING ABOUT
HAVING THE MILITARY BEHIND
HIM.
AND THAT IS NOT GOOD FOR
PAKISTANI DEMOCRACY.
THE PEOPLE OF PAKISTAN
SHOULD BE ABLE TO ELECT THE
GOVERNMENT.
AND IF THE GOVERNMENT DOES
NOT PERFORM WELL THEY SHOULD
BE ABLE TO VOTE IT OUT AT
THE NEXT ELECTION.
UNFORTUNATELY, THEY'RE NOT
BEING ALLOWED TO DO THAT AND
THAT DOES NOT GO WELL FOR
EITHER PAKISTAN DEMOCRACY OR
STABILITY IN PAKISTAN.
>> Woodruff: THE R O
WORLD IS LOOKING AT THIS AND
AMONG OTHER THINGS SAYING
HOW DOES THIS AFFECT THE
REGION, ESPECIALLY PEOPLE IN
THE UNITED STATES ARE SAYING
HOW DOES IT AFFECT
AFGHANISTAN.
AND PAKISTAN CLEARLY PLAYS A
BIG ROLE.
THE PAKISTANI TALIBAN, WHAT
IS THE EFFECT ON WHAT'S
GOING ON IN AFGHANISTAN OR
IS THERE AN EFFECT?
>> THE VERY SIMPLE EFFECT IS
PAKISTAN AND PAKISTANIES
HAVE HAD NO CHANCE FOR THE
PAST TWO WEEKS TO FOCUS ON
THE REAL THINGS PAKISTAN
NEEDS TO WORRY ABOUT.
THAT INCLUDES THE PAKISTANI
TALIBAN FIGHTING THE
PAKISTANI ARMY.
THAT INCLUDES THE AFGHAN
SITUATION NEXT DOOR.
THAT INCLUDES THE
RELATIONSHIP WITH INDIA.
THAT INCLUDES ALL THE
PROBLEMS INTERNALLY.
ANYTHING THAT YOU LOOK AT ON
THE PAKISTANI TELEVISION IS
ABOUT THE POLITICAL CRISIS
WHICH IS NOT MOVING AN INCH
FOR THE PAST TWO WEEKS.
>> Woodruff: WHERE DOES THAT
LEAVE PAKISTAN'S RELATIONS
WITH THE REG AND AND WITH
THE UNITED STATES.
THE UNITED STATES HAS SAID
VERY LITTLE ABOUT THIS.
>> IN LIMBO.
AND THE FACT REMAINS THAT
PAKISTAN HAS DEEP DOMESTIC
CRISIS.
ONE-THIRD OF SCHOOL AGE
CHILDREN DO NOT GO TO
SCHOOL.
ITS ECONOMY IS A SHAMBLES.
IT DEPENDS LARGELY ON
FOREIGN ASSISTANCE.
ITS RELATIONSHIP WITH INDIA
IS SOMETHING THAT NEEDS TO
BE SETTLED.
AND ITS FUTURE IN RELATION
TO AFGHANISTAN IS ALSO
SOMETHING THE PAKISTANI
GOVERNMENT NEEDS TO PAY
ATTENTION TO.
BUT IF EVERY FEW MONTHS A
GOVERNMENT IS ELECT THEY
WILL BE ORCHESTRATED
PROTESTS WITH THE HELP OF
THE MEDIA, AS WELL AS BEHIND
THE SCENES MANIPULATION BY
THE MILITARY, PAKISTAN WILL
NOT FIND THEIR STABILITY
THAT IT NEEDS TO FOCUS ON
THOSE PROBLEMS.
>> Woodruff: QUICKLY, BOTH
OF YOU SEE THIS CONTINUING
FOR SOME TIME BEFORE IT'S
REVOLVED.
>> I DO.
I DON'T SEE ANYTHING THAT
WILL END THIS QUICKLY IN A
DAY OR TWO.
I DON'T SEE THAT HAPPENING.
>> I DON'T SEE IT ENDING AND
A GOOD SOLUTION OR OUTCOME.
>> TRUE.
>> Woodruff: ON THAT
SOBERING NOTE, FORMER
AMBASSADOR HUSSAIN HAQQANI
MOEED YUSUF, WE THANK YOU
BOTH.
>> PLEASURE.
>> Woodruff: OUR NEXT REPORT
LOOKS AT AN INNOVATIVE SUMMER
SCHOOL PROGRAM HERE IN THE U.S.
DESIGNED TO MOTIVATE ITS
STUDENTS TO APPLY FOR COLLEGE.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT TERRY
RUBIN REPORTS FROM MINNESOTA.
>> Reporter: IT'S THE MIDDLE OF
THE SUMMER IN ST. PAUL,
MINNESOTA AND THESE SIXTH,
SEVENTH AND EIGHTH GRADERS ARE
HOP-SCOTCHING THEIR WAY INTO
SCHOOL.
THESE STUDENTS ARE NOT TAKING
SUMMER SCHOOL BECAUSE THEY HAVE
TO, BUT BECAUSE THEY WANT TO.
INSTEAD OF GOING  TO A
CLASSROOM, THEY GO FOR A ROUSING
GAME OF DODGE BALL.
THIS UNUSUAL START TO A DAY IS
ACTUALLY QUITE NORMAL FOR A
PROGRAM CALLED BREAKTHROUGH, AN
EIGHT-HOUR A DAY, FIVE-DAY A
WEEK SUMMER ENRICHMENT PROGRAM
FOR MIDDLE-SCHOOLERS AND SOON-
TO-BE HIGH SCHOOL FRESHMEN.
THEY TAKE COURSES IN MATH,
ENGLISH, SCIENCE, AND SOCIAL
STUDIES AND SAY THEY HAVE  FUN
DOING IT.
>> DON'T STOP, YOU KNOW THAT IT
IS BREAKTHROUGH!
>> Reporter: ESPECIALLY WHEN
MUSIC CUES THEM TO DANCE FROM
CLASS TO CLASS.
BREAKTHROUGH IS A UNIQUE SUMMER
PROGRAM WITH THE  SOLE FOCUS OF
SHOWING LOW INCOME UNDER
RESOURCED MIDDLE SCHOOL STUDENTS
HOW TO GET TO COLLEGE.
MIKISHA NATION IS THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF TWIN CITIES
BREAKTHROUGH.
>> BREAKTHROUGHS MISSION, AT ITS
CORE ITS ABOUT TWO REALLY
IMPORTANT ISSUES.
THE FIRST IS PREPARING UNDER-
RESOURCED STUDENTS FOR COLLEGE
SUCCESS, AND THE SECOND IS
ENGAGING AND INSPIRING THE NEXT
GENERATION OF EDUCATORS, AND WE
DO THIS THROUGH A UNIQUE MODEL
OF STUDENTS TEACHING STUDENTS.
NATION SAYS IT IS THIS IDEA OF
STUDENTS TEACHING STUDENTS THAT
HAS LED TO BREAKTHROUGH'S
SUCCESS IN GETTING THESE MIDDLE-
SCHOOLERS TO BELIEVE THEY CAN GO
TO COLLEGE.
BREAKTHROUGH EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
AROUND THE COUNTRY SAY THERE ARE
TWO ELEMENTS THAT MAKE THIS
PROGRAM UNIQUE:  IT IMPLANTS
THE IDEA OF ATTENDING COLLEGE
WHILE STUDENTS ARE YOUNG AND
IMPRESSIONABLE AND IT SHOWS THEM
WHAT THEY HAVE TO DO FOR THE
NEXT  SIX YEARS TO GET THERE.
JEFF OCHS HAS BEEN CONNECTED TO
TWIN CITIES BREAKTHROUGH FOR
MORE THAN TEN YEARS.
HE SAYS THEY MAKE SURE STUDENTS
ARE ON THE RIGHT TRACK FROM THE
BEGINNING.
>> THE FIRST THING THAT WE DO IS
WE REALLY WORK TO MAKE SURE THAT
SEE STUDENTS ARE IN HONORS
COURSES DURING THEIR SCHOOL
YEAR.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT INSIDE
THOSE SCHOOLS THEY'RE IN THE
COURSES THAT ARE PREPARING THEM
THE BEST FOR COLLEGE, AND SO,
YOU KNOW, NOT ONLY ARE THEY
GETTING ACADEMIC SUPPORT, BUT
THEY'RE ALSO IN A CULTURE, A
COLLEGE GOING CULTURE WITH THEIR
PEER GROUP THAT'S REALLY GOING
TO SUPPORT THEM ON THAT JOURNEY.
>> Reporter: THE MIDDLE
SCHOOLERS SAY THE LEARNING
EXPERIENCE ITSELF IS DIFFERENT.
DYNASTY ANDERSON IS IN HER FIRST
YEAR AT BREAKTHROUGH.
>> THEY TEACH IN A DIFFERENT
WAY, THEY JUST DON'T LIKE STAND
IN FRONT OF THE CLASS AND SAY
OH, YOU'RE GOING TO DO THIS,
THIS AND THIS, LIKE REGULAR
SCHOOL.
THEY GIVE YOU OPTIONS, AND THEY
ASK DO WE HAVE ANY QUESTIONS IN
BETWEEN ALMOST EVERYTHING THEY
SAY, INSTEAD OF LIKE SCHOOL, WE
HAVE TO WAIT UNTIL THE END, AND
WE MIGHT FORGET OUR QUESTIONS.
>> Reporter: ANOTHER DIFFERENCE,
ACCORDING TO SOON TO BE HIGH
SCHOOLER BECKY STARK, HOMEWORK
IS CALLED BOOYA.
>> A LOT OF PEOPLE ASSOCIATE
HOMEWORK WITH BORING, NOT FUN,
SOMETHING YOU HAVE TO DO THAT
JUST TAKES UP YOUR TIME.
BUT HERE, EVERY TIME SOMEONE
SAYS BOOYA YOU HAVE TO RESPOND
WITH BOOYA.
YOU HAVE TO REPEAT IT.
AND IT JUST KEEPS THE ENERGY UP,
IT MAKES EVERYONE FEEL WELCOME
AND TOGETHER
>> Reporter: IN THE TWIN CITIES,
100% OF THE STUDENTS WHO
ATTENDED  THE MIDDLE SCHOOL
SUMMER PROGRAM IN ADDITION TO
THE WEEKEND ENRICHMENT SESSIONS
THROUGHOUT HIGH SCHOOL, ARE
ATTENDING COLLEGE THIS FALL.
13-YEAR-OLD LUCIANO MUNOZ IS
BACK FOR A SECOND YEAR AND SAYS
BREAKTHROUGH HAS MADE HIM A
BETTER STUDENT.
>> WHEN I WAS IN SIXTH GRADE,
THEY DIDN'T REALLY GIVE US
GRADES, BUT I'M PRETTY SURE I
MIGHT HAVE HAD C'S.
AND WHEN I CAME BACK FROM
BREAKTHROUGH, I STARTED GETTING
A'S AND B'S DURING SEVENTH
GRADE.
>> Reporter: SITE DIRECTOR BEN
BAUER CITED STUDIES THAT SHOW
WITHOUT THE SUPPORT OR GUIDANCE
OF PROGRAMS LIKE BREAKTHROUGH,
85% OF STUDENTS LIKE THESE ARE
NOT LIKELY TO ATTEND COLLEGE.
>> EVEN THOSE KIDS WHO ARE HIGH
ACHIEVING, AND HIGHLY MOTIVATED
IN ELEMENTARY GOING INTO MIDDLE
SCHOOL CAN DROP OFF, AND A LOT
OF THAT IS BECAUSE ITS NOT THE
NORM, ITS NOT COOL TO LIKE
LEARNING, AND KIDS WANT TO FIT
IN, AT THAT AGE ESPECIALLY,
RIGHT, AND LIKING LEARNING, AND
BEING SMART ISN'T FITTING IN.
WE WANT TO CREATE A PLACE WHERE
THEY ARE FITTING IN, AND
ESPECIALLY IN THE MIDDLE SCHOOL
YEARS THAT'S REALLY POWERFUL,
>> Reporter: NEESHA MOORE SAYS
HER PEERS WERE SURPRISED SHE WAS
ALREADY TALKING ABOUT COLLEGE IN
MIDDLE SCHOOL.
>> MY FRIENDS IT WAS A SURPRISE
TO THEM, THEY WERE LIKE, WHY ARE
YOU LOOKING AT COLLEGES AND
STUFF, WE'RE IN SEVENTH GRADE.
I WAS LIKE, IT DOESN'T REALLY
MATTER, ITS NEVER TOO EARLY TO
START.
WE LEARNED THAT HERE AT
BREAKTHROUGH.
>> Reporter: STUDENTS MUST APPLY
TO GET INTO THIS PROGRAM.
THIS SUMMERERVED
MORE THAN 4,000 STUDENTS
NATIONWIDE.
ALTHOUGH, AT VARIOUS SITES, THEY
TURNED AWAY ANYWHERE FROM 40 TO
60% OF APPLICANTS BASED ON A
LACK OF FUNDING OR LACK OF
FACILITIES.
TWIN CITIES BREAKTHROUGH BECAME
ONE OF THE FEW CITIES TO HAVE
MULTIPLE FACILITIES AS THEY HAVE
PARTNERED WITH MINNEAPOLIS AND
ST. PAUL PUBLIC SCHOOLS OPENING
UP TWO MORE SITES IN LOW INCOME
NEIGHBORHOODS.
STILL, THE PROGRAM COULD ONLY
ACCEPT 150 OUT OF MORE THAN 400
APPLICANTS.
NATIONALLY, BREAKTHROUGH LEADERS
SAY IT COSTS ON AVERAGE MORE
THAN $25,000 PER STUDENT TO RUN
THE SIX-WEEK PROGRAM.
THEIR FUNDING COMES FROM
CORPORATE SPONSORS, GRANTS, AND
INDIVIDUAL DONATIONS.
TO CREATE THIS DISTINCT CULTURE,
BREAKTHROUGH DIRECTORS AWARD
ABOUT 800 HANDS-ON TEACHING
FELLOWSHIPS AT 27 SITES ACROSS
THE COUNTRY EACH YEAR.
THEY SAY THE FELLOWS ARE THE KEY
TO THE PROGRAM'S SUCCESS.
COLLEGE JUNIOR DENISE
QUINTANILLA WAS A BREAKTHROUGH
STUDENT AND IS NOW  TEACHING
SCIENCE.
HANAN FARAH IS ENTERING HER
SENIOR YEAR OF HIGH SCHOOL AND
IS TEACHING SOCIAL STUDIES.
BOTH THESE TEACHING FELLOWS SAY
THE SYSTEM WORKS BECAUSE THEY
RELATE TO THE KIDS.
>> IT'S JUST UNDERSTANDING HOW
THEY WORK, AND HOW YOU WORK,
BECAUSE YOU'RE NOT TOO FAR APART
IN AGE, WHICH IS REALLY NICE,
AND YOU'RE ALSO ABLE TO BUILD A
RELATIONSHIP THAT IS BASED ON
FRIENDSHIP AS WELL, AND YOU'RE A
ROLE MODEL TO THEM, BECAUSE YOU
ARE NOT JUST THEIR TEACHER BUT
FRIEND AND ROLE MODEL AS WELL.
>> THEY KNOW THAT YOU'RE GOING
THROUGH THE SAME THING, THAT YOU
HAVE HOMEWORK, AND THAT YOU HAVE
CLASSES YOU NEED TO GET TO IN
THE MORNING, WE WAKE UP AT THE
SAME TIME DURING THE SCHOOL
YEAR, SO THAT'S WHY STUDENTS CAN
REALLY RELATE TO US.
>> Reporter: DANIEL BRENAL USED
TO BE A TEACHING FELLOW, AND NOW
IS A FULL TIME TEACHER IN  ST.
PAUL PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
HE TRAINS THE CURRENT CROP OF
YOUNG EDUCATORS.
>> ONE OF THE REASONS THAT OUR
TEACHERS ARE SO SUCCESSFUL AT
BREAKTHROUGH, BEING TEACHERS, IS
BECAUSE OF THE SUPPORT THAT THEY
GET FROM THE STAFF, AND FROM THE
COACHES LIKE ME, WHO WORK WITH
THEM TO MAKE SURE EVERY LESSON
IS HIGH QUALITY, EVERY LESSON IS
GOING TO WORK FOR THEIR
STUDENTS, IS GOING TO BE
ENGAGING.
IT'S INTERESTING BECAUSE WE GET
A LOT OF COLLEGE STUDENTS WHO
THINK, OH, I'D LOVE TO DO
SOMETHING FUN IN THE SUMMER,
SOMETHING ACADEMIC, SOMETHING
WITH KIDS, AND THEY NEVER
THOUGHT OF TEACHING BEFORE, THEY
FIND OUT ABOUT BREAKTHROUGH AND
IT'S JUST INFECTIOUS, IN A GOOD
WAY.
>> Reporter: MORE THAN 70% OF
THE TWIN CITY BREAKTHROUGH
TEACHING FELLOWS ULTIMATELY
CHOOSE A CAREER IN EDUCATION.
BEN BAUER IS ONE OF THOSE.
HE SPENT FIVE YEARS WITH
BREAKTHROUGH
>> WHEN I GOT THIS OPPORTUNITY
ONE THING THAT REALLY STUCK OUT
WAS JUST BEING WITH KIDS, AND
ACTUALLY GETTING THAT HANDS ON
EXPERIE,
KIDS IN GENERAL, BUT SPECIFIC
GRADE GROUPS.
I FELL IN LOVE WITH THE STUDENTS
WE HAVE HERE, AND IT MADE ME
WANT TO GO TEACH IN A LOW INCOME
OL SOMETHING
THAT WASN'T EVEN ON MY RADAR
BEFORE.
>> Reporter: WHILE THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR IS LOOKING FOR WAYS TO
EXPAND AND REACH MORE KIDS,
TEACHING FELLOWS SAY THEY END
EACH DAY THE SAME WAY THEY
STARTED.
SHOWING THESE MIDDLE-SCHOOLERS
THE PATH TO COLLEGE, WITH A
LITTLE DANCING.
>> Woodruff: THE FOOTBALL SEASON
IS JUST GETTING UNDERWAY.
WITH HUGE INTEREST, BIG BUCKS,
AND LOTS OF QUESTIONS.
JEFFREY IS BACK WITH OUR LOOK AT
HOW FOOTBALL RELATES TO OUR
CULTURE.
>> Brown: IT'S BY FAR THE MOST
POPULAR SPORT IN AMERICA, BUT
FOOTBALL ALSO CONTINUES TO
GARNER HEADLINES BEYOND THE
SPORTS PAGE.
FOR ITS VIOLENCE AND HEALTH
RISKS FROM CONCUSSIONS AND FOR
CASES OF DOMESTIC ABUSE BY
PLAYERS.
LAST WEEK, NFL COMMISSIONER
ROGER GOODELL ANNOUNCED A
TOUGHER POLICY TO DEAL WITH
PLAYERS INVOLVED IN SUCH CASES.
JUST THIS WEEKEND, THERE WAS
ANOTHER CASE, AS SAN FRANCISCO
49ERS DEFENSIVE END RAY MCDONALD
WAS ARRESTED FOR DOMESTIC
VIOLENCE AGAINST HIS FIANCE.
WHAT TO MAKE OF THIS SPORT THAT
HAS SUCH A GRIP ON AMERICAN
CULTURE?
THE NEW BOOK, "WHY FOOTBALL
MATTERS: MY EDUCATION IN THE
GAME" IS ONE RESPONSE.
ITS AUTHOR, UNIVERSITY OF
VIRGINIA PROFESSOR MARK
EDMUNDSON, JOINS ME NOW.
FOOTBALL IS A KIND OF
TRAINING GROUND.
YOU STARTED THIS AS A
PERSONAL THING.
A BRAINING GROUND FOR YOU.
TEACHES YOU WHEN YOU'RE
KNOCKED DOWN TO GET UP.
>> KNOCKED DOWN TO GET UP.
I MEAN I THINK THERE IS A
LOT OF TRUTH IN WHAT THE
COACHES SAY, THAT IT CAN
HELP YOU DEVELOP COURAGE,
LOYALTY T CAN HELP YOU
DEVELOP CHARACTER.
BUT THERE'S A DOWNSIDE TO
ALL THOSE THINGS.
THERE'S A DARK SIDE TO THE
GAME.
SOME OF WHAT MY BOOK IS
ABOUT IS TRYING TO LET THE
BETTER STUFF COME THROUGH
AND MAKE PEOPLE MORE AWAY OF
THE DARK SIDES A.
SO THEY CAN BE VIGILANT
ABOUT IT.
>> Brown: THE BETTER STUFF
STARTS WITH YOUR OWN
EXPERIENCE.
>> YEAH, I WAS IF PRETTY
ROUGH SHAPE WHEN I WAS A
YUNNIER IN HIGH SCHOOL.
MY FAMILY WAS IN VERY, VERY
ROUGH CONDITION.
MY SISTER JUST DIED.
MY FATHER WAS TAKING IT
HARD.
MY MOTHER WAS VERY CLOSE TO
BREAKING DOWN.
AND YOU KNOW, WE NEEDED
SOMETHING, I'M NOT SAYING TO
THE BALL SAVED MY LIFE OR
ANYTHING BUT IT WAS DARN
HELPFUL TO HAVE SOMEPLACE TO
GO, WHERE I COULD TRY TO
IMPROVE, TRY TO GET BETTER
AT.
I DIDN'T CARE MUCH ABOUT THE
SCHOOL.
BUT FOOTBALL GAVE ME SOME
FOCUS AND SOME ATTENTION AND
REALLY HELPED ME TO DEVELOP
AT A TIME WHEN I DIDN'T HAVE
MUCH ELSE GOING ON FOR ME.
>> SO PART OF THE BOOK IS
ABOUT YOUR OWN PERSONAL
EXPERIENCE AND THEN YOU GET
BIG.
FOOTBALL IS OUR NATIONAL
PASTIME.
BUT ALSO SIGNIFYING A
COUNTRY THAT IS A
MORE-- LIKE COUNTRY, NOW,
RIGHT?
>> AS IT CHANGED FROM WHEN
BASEBALL WAS THE PASTIME.
>> YOU HIT IT.
THAT IS THE-- BASEBALL IS
WHAT WE WERE, TO THE BALL IS
WHAT WE HAVE BECOME.
AND WHAT IS THAT?
YOU KNOW, A COUNTRY MORE
PERHAPS WILLING TO OWN TO
ITS OWN WAR-LIKE NATURE.
AND THAT'S A LITTLE BIT
DISTRESING.
AT THE SAME TIME, YOU KNOW,
THE PREPARATION TO BE A
SOLDIER, THE PREPARATION TO
BE BRAVE, THAT CAN BE
VALUABLE FOR A YOUNG MAN OR
A YOUNG WOMAN.
THERE IS A LOT OF PARADOX
INVOLVE IN THE FOOTBALL AT
THIS POINT.
>> Brown: SO THE KIND OF
HEADLINES THAT I WAS
REFERRING TO, THE DOMESTIC
VIOLENCE, DO YOU SEE THINGS
LIKE THAT IS PART OF THE
CULTURE OR THE BREEDING
GROUND OF THE GAME.
I MEAN HOW DO YOU --
>> I THINK YOU KNOW, PLATO
TALKED ABOUT THIS QUALITY, A
SPIRITEDNESS, PASSION,
INTENSITY.
AND EVAL UED IT BUT HE SAW
THAT IT REALLY NEEDED TO BE
EDUCATED.
AND WHEN YOU SEND PEOPLE OUT
IN THE FIELD AND SAY HIT AS
HARD AS YOU CAN, BLOCK AS
HARD AS YOU CAN.
THEY ARE GOING TO DEVELOP A
STRONG DOSE OF SPIRITEDNESS.
AND YOU'VE GOT TO HELP THEM
TO UNDERSTAND THAT THERE IS
AN ON THE FIELD AN OFF THE
FEEL AND IT'S NOT EASY, BUT
THERE'S A GOOD SIDE TO IT
SPIRITED PEOPLE, ARE THE
PEOPLE WHO OUTSIDE OF
FOOTBALL GET THINGS DONE.
THEY WRITE BOOKS AND START
BUSINESSES AND TEACH SCHOOL
AND THEY BECOME PHYSICIANS.
AND SO YOU GET REALLY
IMPORTANT QUALITY TO PLAY.
THIS SPIRITED THING.
BUT IT'S ALSO REALLY
DANGEROUS.
>> SO DO YOU SEE THE CULTURE
INSIDE FOOTBALL TRYING TO
ADDRESS THINGS LIKE THAT,
AND THE LARGER CULTURE,
LOOKING IN AT IT, DOES IT,
IS THERE A CHANCE OF PEOPLE
TURNING AWAY FROM THAT
VIOLENT CULTURE?
>> I THINK IT'S A TOUGH ONE,
YOU KNOW.
I THINK THAT THE PROGRESS IS
GETTING MADTHERE'S MORE THOUGHTT
IT YOU SEE HEADLINES ABOUT
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE, YOU SEE
THE NFL TAKING STEPS.
THERE'S A LOT MORE THOUGHTS
ABOUT CONCUSSION AND HOW TO
DEAL WITH THOSE.
I THINK THE NFL COULD
PROBABLY GO FURTHER THOUGH
I'M NO POLICY EXPERT.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME YOU DO
SEE PEOPLE SIT DOWN ON
SUNDAY AFTERNOON AND WATCH
OTHER PEOPLE DO
EXTRAORDINARY DEEDS AN WATCH
THOSE PEOPLE BE VERY BRAVE
IN CERTAIN WAYS THAT CAN BE
MOVING TO CERTAIN PEOPLE.
>> WHAT ABOUT THE ARGUMENT,
HERE I'M THINKING ABOUTGH
SCHOOLS.
>> YES.
>> WHEN I HAVE TALKED ON THE
PROGRAM HERE TO PEOPLE ABOUT
THE CRISIS IN PUBLIC
EDUCATION.
>> YEAH.
>> AND I'M THINKING IN
PARTICULAR OF THE BOOK
CALLED SMARTEST KIDS IN THE
WORLD.
WHERE SHE WAS, AMANDA RIPLY
WAS COMPARING HIGH SCHOOLS
AROUND THE WORLD.
AND WHERE KIDS DO BET PER IN
HIGH SCHOOLS WHERE IN MOST
CASES THERE'S NOT MUCH
EMPHASIS ON SPORTS.
ONE ARGUMENT IS WE NEED LESS
SPORTS IN HIGH SCHOOL.
NOT MORE.
>> RIGHT.
WELL, YOU KNOW T MAY BE THAT
YOU CAN DEVELOP YOUR
INTELLIGENCE BETTER.
ISOLATED FROM SPORTS.
BUT WE'RE NOT JUST HUMAN
INTELLIGENCE, RIGHT.
WE'RE MORE THAN INTELLIGENCE.
WE'RE ALSO THAT SPIRITED
PART.
AND YOU HAVE TO DEVELOP THAT
TOO AND HELP WAKE IT UP AND
HELP CHANNEL IT AND THAT'S
WHAT SPORTS DOES.
I WOULD LIKE TO SEE MORE
DIALOGUE BETWEEN SPORTS AND
THE ACADEMIC LIFE OR
INTELLECTUAL LIFE BUT I
WOULDN'T WANT TO LOSE THE
SPORTS PART.
>> BUT THAT IS, BOTH SIDES
OF YOUR LIFE.
BECAUSE YOU ARE AN ENGLISH
LITERATURE PROFESSOR.
WRITING A BOOK ABOUT
FOOTBALL AND ABOUT YOUR PAST
IN HIGH SCHOOL.
>> THAT IS BOTH SIDES OF MY
LIFE.
AND YOU KNOW, I CONTINUE AND
I OWE IT REALLY A GREAT DEBT
OF GRATITUDE THE FACT THAT I
CAN STILL GET OUT THERE AND
EXERCISE HAVE A GOOD TIME.
I PLAY BASKETBALL 3 OR 4
TIMES A WEEK, AS I TELL
PEOPLE, DID YOU GO PLAY
BASKETBALL.
I SAY THE OTHER NINE GUYS
DID.
THAT'S PART OF THE LEGACY OF
HAVING TRAINED PIE BODY A
LITTLE BIT AND SEEING WHAT
BENEFITS COULD COME FROM IT
WHEN I WAS VERY YOUNG, IT
STUCK WITH ME.
I'M GRATEFUL FOR IT.
>> THE BOOK IS WHY FOOTBALL
MATTERS MY EDUCATION OF THE
GAME, MARK EASY MONDAYSON,
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
TALKS AIMED AT RESTORING PEACE
IN UKRAINE OPENED AGAINST THE
BACKDROP OF BATTLEFIELD GAINS BY
THE UKRAINIAN REBELS.
NATO'S HEAD CALLED FOR A READY-
RESPONSE FORCE TO DETER POSSIBLE
RUSSIAN AGGRESSION IN EASTERN
EUROPE.
AND THREE AMERICANS HELD IN
NORTH KOREA APPEALED FOR A
HIGH-RANKING U.S. REPRESENTATIVE
TO NEGOTIATE THEIR RELEASE.
ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE THIS
LABOR DAY, WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED
FROM THIS SUMMER'S
EMPLOYEE WALK-OUT FROM
SUPERMARKET CHAIN "MARKET
BASKET?"
NEWSHOUR CONTRIBUTOR CHRISTOPHER
MACKIN WEIGHS IN ON THE RECENT
HIGH PROFILE STRUGGLE OVER
OWNERSHIP OF THE GROCERY STORES.
THAT'S ON OUR MAKING SENSE PAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.